#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass letter
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\leftmargin 3cm
\topmargin 3cm
\rightmargin 3cm
\bottommargin 3cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout My Address

Ryan Kelly
\newline 
Unit 3, 17 Howson Street
\newline 
BRUNSWICK WEST, 3055
\newline 
Telephone: (03)93877743
\newline 
Email: ryan@rfk.id.au
\layout Send To Address

The Postgraduate Officer
\newline 
Faculty of Engineering
\newline 
The University of Melbourne
\newline 
PARKVILLE, 3010
\layout Signature

Ryan Kelly
\layout Opening

To whom it may concern,
\layout Standard

I am writing in application for admission into a Research Masters degree
 in Computer Science.
 Please find enclosed the necessary application form and curriculum vitae.
\layout Standard

I have been awarded an Australian Postgraduate Award for study commencing
 in 2005, with the requirement that I commence before the 31st of March.
 Unfortunately external work commitments and a change of research topic
 have seen me put this application off for far too long.
 While I understand that the admissions process can be lengthy and am making
 arrangements for a possible late start to the scholarship, anything that
 could be done to process my application quickly would be very much appreciated.
\layout Standard

If successful I am hoping to commence study as soon as possible.
 Thanks for your consideration.
\newline 

\layout Closing

Yours sincerely,
\the_end
