#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass letter
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\leftmargin 3cm
\topmargin 3cm
\rightmargin 3cm
\bottommargin 3cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout My Address

Ryan Kelly
\newline 
Unit 3, 17 Howson Street
\newline 
BRUNSWICK WEST, 3055
\newline 
Telephone: (03)93877743
\newline 
Email: ryan@rfk.id.au
\layout Send To Address

Postgraduate Scholarships Team
\newline 
Melbourne Scholarships Office
\newline 
John Smyth Building 
\newline 
THE UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE, 3010
\layout Signature

Ryan Kelly
\layout Opening

To whom it may concern,
\layout Standard

I am writing in application for late commencement of my Australian Postgraduate
 Award scholarship.
 I have been employed full-time with the Victorian Partnership for Advanced
 Computing since the completion of my undergraduate degree, and have thus
 been unable to commence my postgraduate studies.
 In addition, my area of interest has changed significantly and I have been
 working with members of the faculty to develop a new research topic.
 This has meant delaying my official enrollment with the faculty.
\layout Standard

While I have arranged to cease full-time work this month, the details of
 my enrollment are yet to be finalised and the deadline for commencement
 is drawing near.
 Considering these circumstances, I would like to change the commencement
 date for my scholarship to the 15th of April.
 I have attached a letter of support for late commencement from my supervisor
 and the head of department, as required.
\layout Standard

Thank you for your consideration.
\newline 

\layout Closing

Yours sincerely,
\the_end
