#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize a4paper
\paperpackage widemarginsa4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Initial Research Proposal: 
\newline 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Extensions to Particle Swarm Optimisation Techniques
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\layout Author

Ryan Kelly
\layout Standard

Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) is a population-based optimization technique,
 motivated by the simulation of animal social behaviors such as fish schooling
 or bird flocking.
 As with other population-based optimization methods (such as Genetic Algorithms
) the PSO algorithm starts by randomly initialising a population of individuals
 in the search space.
 Unlike other evolutionary methods, PSO involves no recombination of genetic
 material between individuals, instead utilising social behavior of particles
 in the swarm.
 At each iteration, it seeks the global optimal solution by adjusting the
 trajectory of each individual toward its own best location and towards
 the best particle in the entire swarm.
\layout Standard

Advantages of PSO over similar techniques include its relatively simple
 implementation and the low number of parameters to be selected by the operator.
 However, like most population-based techniques the selection of population
 parameters still involves a degree of trial-and-error, and the success
 or failure of an optimisation run can be highly dependent on the parameters
 chosen.
\layout Standard

I propose to investigate extensions to the particle swarm concept in order
 to allow parameter selection to be accomplished automatically, increasing
 the robustness and utility of the technique.
 The performance of these extensions will be measured through empirical
 simulations using well-known benchmarks, with the major objective being
 to improve performance after a pre-defined number of generations.
\layout Standard

The major stages in this project are expected to be:
\layout Enumerate

Review of state-of-the-art in Particle Swarm Optimisation
\layout Enumerate

Review of parameter automation strategies utilised in other population-based
 techniques, such as genetic algorithms
\layout Enumerate

Development of testing framework, incorporating suitable benchmarks
\layout Enumerate

Initial development of promising extensions
\layout Enumerate

Detailed testing and evaluation of extensions
\layout Standard

In addition to new extensions to the particle swarm technique, the outcomes
 of this project will include source code implementing these extensions
 and a framework for the evaluation of further extensions to the technique.
 It is intended that the code produced from this project will facilitate
 further investigations in this area.
 
\the_end
