#LyX 1.4.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 245
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{a4wide}
\end_preamble
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes true
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Cooperative Task Execution
\newline
in the Situation Calculus:
\newline
Progress Report
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Ryan Kelly
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My work continues to progress on schedule and I remain confident that the
 thesis can be finalised within my current candidature arrangements.
 The past year has seen two conference publications of my work, along with
 acceptance for a third (see references).
 I have also formulated a more detailed thesis outline and continued work
 on the manuscripts that will form the bulk of the thesis.
 This outline is attached along with an indication of the current status
 of each component.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Thanks to insights gained from recent conferences, my timeline has been
 modified to allow more time for implementation based on new techniques
 for automated reasoning.
 The tasks remaining in my research plan are:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Now - June 2007:
\series default
 Develop an automated reasoning system to support epistemic reasoning based
 on my new formalism 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{kelly07sc_know_obs,kelly07sc_persistence}

\end_inset

.
 Present poster at AAMAS'07.
 Complete work on reasoning about common knowledge.
 Prepare and submit journal version of 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{kelly06hlp_dps}

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
July - Oct 2007:
\series default
 Finalise and implement distributed execution strategy.
 Prepare manuscript for submission to AAMAS'08 or AAAI'08.
 Compose manuscripts into thesis draft.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Nov 2007 - Jan 2008:
\series default
 Finalise implementation.
 Perform testing using networked departmental machines as agents.
 Second draft of thesis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Feb 2008 - Apr 2008:
\series default
 Finalisation of thesis.
 Thesis submission.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset LatexCommand \bibtex[plain]{/storage/uni/pgrad/library/references}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
