#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Situations as Full Histories of the World
\layout Author

Ryan Kelly
\layout Abstract

Recent formulations of the Situation Calculus conceptualise situation terms
 as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

histories of the world
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 This is typically formalised by having situations be lists of the actions
 that have occured since the initial situation.
 When the situation calculus is enriched with notions such as time, concurrent
 actions and sensing actions, this 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

lists of actions
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 approach becomes more cumbersome as more information is required to construct
 the history of the world: Which actions occured concurrently? At what time
 did they occur? What was the outcome of the sensing actions? We argue that
 such concerns should be dealt with in a principled way by focussing on
 the conceptual intent of situation terms - that they should encode a complete
 history of the world.
 We demonstrate how this can be done, and show that it simplifies the account
 of several extensions to the situation calculus.
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Standard

The situation calculus 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{McCHay69sitcalc}

\end_inset 

 is a popular formalism for representing dynamic worlds.
 Since its inception, many extensions have been proposed to enrich it with
 concepts such as time 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{pinto94temporal}

\end_inset 

, natural and concurrent actions 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{reiter96sc_nat_conc}

\end_inset 

, knowledge and sensing actions 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{scherl03sc_knowledge}

\end_inset 

.
 One of its fundamental concepts is, not surprisingly, the 
\emph on 
situation
\emph default 
.
 Recent popular formalations of the situation calculus (based on the work
 of Reiter et.
 al.
 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{reiter91frameprob}

\end_inset 

) view situations as histories of what has happened in the world.
 In practise this means that situations are represented as lists of actions.
\layout Standard

While this representation works very well for the base situation calculus,
 extended versions often need to modify the representation of situations.
 Introducing concurrent actions requires situations to be lists of 
\emph on 
sets
\emph default 
 of actions, with each set representing all the actions that occured concurrentl
y at each instant.
 An explicit temporal component is introduced by adding an additional argument
 to each action function that gives the time at which it occured.
\layout Standard

TODO: blahdy blah, justification goes here
\layout Section

Formalism
\layout Standard

We introduce a new sort 
\noun on 
event
\noun default 
 that encapsulates all the information about what transpired to move from
 one situation to the next.
 The successor situation function 
\begin_inset Formula $do$
\end_inset 

 then has signature 
\begin_inset Formula $EVENT\times SITUATION\rightarrow SITUATION$
\end_inset 

 and behaves much the same as in the base situation calculus.
 Different extensions can then be formalised by the structure of 
\noun on 
event 
\noun default 
terms and functions defined upon them.
 
\layout Standard

When a temporal component is introduced, events should take the form of
 
\begin_inset Formula $<ACTION,TIME>$
\end_inset 

 pairs.
 Functions 
\begin_inset Formula $time$
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $action$
\end_inset 

 are introduced to extract components of the event:
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[
action(<a,t>)=a\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[
time(<a,t>)=t\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

When concurrent actions are introduced, it is redundant to associate a time
 with each action.
 The need for a predicate such as 
\begin_inset Formula $coherent$
\end_inset 

 that ensures consistency can be removed by making events 
\begin_inset Formula $<\{ ACTION\},TIME>$
\end_inset 

 pairs.
 The functions 
\begin_inset Formula $action$
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $time$
\end_inset 

 act as before, with 
\begin_inset Formula $action$
\end_inset 

 returning a set of primitive action terms.
\layout Standard

When sensing actions are introduced, each action should be associated with
 its outcome.
 We thus require 
\begin_inset Formula $<ACTION,OUTCOME>$
\end_inset 

 pairs in place of primitive action terms.
 
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \BibTeX[plain]{/storage/uni/pgrad/library/references}

\end_inset 


\the_end
